                                    Assignment 1

           Uploading Data to the Database
                                  Database Tuning



 Report due:           March 23, 2026, 23:59
 PS Appointment:       March 24, 2026
 Grading:              5 points


Notes
   ˆ It is part of the PS to set up database systems locally on one of your machines.
     The reason is to avoid network latencies, which may explain strange artifacts in
     your measurements. That is, please ensure that client and server run on the same
     machine.
   ˆ This assignment involves reading the documentation of Java, the JDBC driver, and
     PostgreSQL. Finding the relevant sources of information is part of the challenge.
   ˆ It is suggested that you also have a look at the report template before you start
     working on the assignment.
   ˆ In the third part of this assignment, you are supposed to set up a second DBMS
     on your own machine. The recommendation is to use MariaDB. We will use the
     two systems in the future to investigate how different systems react to our tuning
     attempts.


Setting up PostgreSQL
   ˆ It is suggested to use one of the latest PostgreSQL deployments. If you want to
     use exactly (not required) the same versions, I use: PostgreSQL 13 with JDBC
     driver 4.2 in version 42.2.18.
   ˆ Nevertheless, you may use different versions of PostgreSQL. Similarly, if you prefer
     a different programming language for client implementation, feel free to use it.
   ˆ Installing PG Admin as development environment may also help


Support
If there are any ambiguities or problems of understanding regarding the assignment, you
have the following possibilities to clarify them:
   ˆ via mail




                                           1
Data

Download dblp.zip at:
https://dbresearch.uni-salzburg.at/downloads/teaching/2018ss/dbt/dblp.zip

This archive contains two tab separated files (publ.tsv and auth.tsv) that store authors
and their publications as found in the DBLP1 bibliography. The imported tables have
the following schemas:
      ˆ Auth(name(49),pubID(129))
      ˆ Publ(pubID(129),type(13),title(700),booktitle(132),
             year(4),publisher(196))
You can assume that all attribute values are strings; the maximum string length is shown
in brackets.
The straightforward algorithm to load the data from the TSV file to a table issues an
SQL INSERT query for each line in the TSV file.


Straightforward Implementation

Implement the straightforward approach to load auth.tsv to the database (PostgreSQL,
Java/Python).2


Efficient Approaches

The straightforward approach is slow. There are other approaches that are significantly
faster. Figure out how the efficient approaches work and implement at least one of them.


Portability

Set up a different database system locally on your machine and import the data. What
parts of your code do you need to change? Do you observe the same performance
differences?


Report
      1. Describe the two efficient approaches you implemented.
      2. Give the runtime for loading auth.tsv with the straightforward and the efficient
         approaches.
      3. Why are the efficient approaches faster?
      4. Which tuning principle did you apply?
      5. How did you ensure portability of your code?

Please indicate the average time per group member that was spent solving this assign-
ment. The time that you indicate will have no impact on your grade.




 1
     http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/
 2
     This might be very slow. Instead of loading all the data with this approach, you can also load part of
      the data and assume that runtime scales linearly. Mention this in the report.




                                                       2
Grading scheme:

 Category                                                Max. Points
 Description of your setup                               0.5
 Why is the straightforward approach slow?               1.5
 Why is your efficient approach faster?                  1.5
 Report on you portability findings.                     1.5
 Bonus: You found the most efficient approach            0.5

Reminder: Additional questions about the involved topics/techniques will be asked during the meeting.

Important: If the grading scheme is unclear, ask the instructor!




                                                              3
